Three, one, two, three, one, two, three.
Testing, one, two, three, one, two, three, one, two, three.
This is August the 8th in the Small Animal Clinic of the College of Veterinary Medicine, and I have the pleasure and honor of chatting with Dr. Bonnie Beaver, professor of... Small Animal Medicine and Surgery.
Small Animal Medicine and Surgery.
Bonnie, to begin with, would you introduce yourself to this tape by describing family, where you grew up, went to high school, went to college, before you came to College Station?
Well, I'm a Minnesota product.
I was raised in a small farm just west of the Minneapolis area in Minnesota and grew up with one sister, a mother and father.
My father passed away when I was a junior in high school and graduated from Mound, Minnesota High School.
Went to the University of Minnesota, did my pre-veterinary work there, which was two years at that time.
Then went into their College of Veterinary Medicine and received my DVM degree.
Actually, I got my bachelor's degree in 66 and my DVM degree in 68.
and then started looking for a job.
The University of Minnesota had an opening.
One of their surgeons had suddenly left and they asked me to come back for a year.
So I'd spent a short time in practice with a local practitioner and then went back to the university in surgery.
And then after that year was up, started looking for other things and decided university life wasn't all that bad.
And where could I go and work on a faculty and work toward an advanced degree at the same time?
And Texas A&M was just one of those places.
And I thought, well, it was one of the few that I couldn't actually visit.
So I said, I'll take a chance.
I'll come down for a year.
And if I don't like it, I'll leave.
So 31 years later, I'm still waiting to leave.
What did you know about A&M at that point?
Nothing.
Absolutely nothing.
I didn't even know what the A&M stood for.
I knew nothing about the traditions or any part of it.
So it was just a university as far as I knew.
Describe your first impression of the vet school and of the community when you arrived.
Well, when I came down, I had a horse trailer on behind with a horse on one side and a television set and boxes and stuff on the other side.
And I actually came down by hitting a couple of horse shows on the way down.
So I got here toward the end of September in the fall of 1969.
I met several of the faculty here.
One of them actually had a boarding place that I could keep my horse for a while and spent the first couple of days looking around and trying to find an apartment.
And I was impressed with the size of the school, but I had come from the University of Minnesota, which at that time was an extremely large campus, at least the Minneapolis campus was.
St.
Paul was small.
And so Texas A&M reminded me of a reasonable size at that time to meet university.
And the people at the veterinary school were just wonderful to be around.
And so I thought, well, this will be interesting.
But I'm young and naive, so it's a good time and a good place to be.
And your title?
I came as an instructor in the Department of Veterinary Anatomy and over the years climbed through the ranks and then moved from the Department of Anatomy into the Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery where I currently still reside.
I won't ask any more of this question.
What was the beginning salary?
I don't remember.
I want to say it was about $7,500, but it's been so long ago I'd really have to go and look at it again.
And describe the terms of your appointment.
Were you supposed to work on a degree?
No, I didn't have to, but I found that I was allowed to take four hours a semester, so that was a fun thing to be able to do.
And I knew that if I was at a school, it would be stupid not to work on an advanced degree, so I did.
And Dean Gage was, in fact, one of the people on my committee.
So it was kind of a fun situation.
Describe the leadership of the College of Veterinary Medicine at that point.
At that time, Al Price was the dean, and Wally Bay was the associate dean for academic affairs.
Describe them and their talents and personality.
Well, it was interesting because Al Price introduced me to the faculty at the first faculty meeting I went to as integrating the faculty.
I was first woman in the college.
That also meant there were a lot of people that didn't exactly know what to do with me.
The department chair of anatomy was Raymond Siss.
He was fairly new in that particular position.
And John Milliff, the former department chair, was still on the faculty, and he was teaching the neuroanatomy courses at that time.
So it was an interesting situation to work with someone.
Dr. Milliff's
brilliance in an area that I knew nothing about and was kind of interested in, and to work with Dr. Siss, who was very generous in allowing people to develop talents in areas that weren't exactly traditional anatomy, but if you had an interest, go for it.
And you had no teaching experience?
I had been on the University of Minnesota faculty for a year in the clinics, so I did have, came in with a year's teaching experience.
describe what it was like to be the first woman there must have been some learning experiences you know the thing that I remember the most which isn't real good sometimes but I remember now looking back on it I was very ignorant and very naive in
the way things could have been, should have been, and so on.
There were a number of times where there would be comments that nowadays you'd get slapped with a sexual harassment suit, but in that
day and age you really didn't even give a second thought to.
I had grown up in a class, if you will, of 56 big brothers and so I was kind of used to having snide comments or made and they were just, they were usually made in fun and not out of detriment to the human and so I kind of didn't pay much attention to it and that probably was a good thing.
At that point, as you look back, were there any things done or said that you now realize were intended negatively?
Yes, there were.
It wasn't as much what was said because in
in a male body of people it probably was at that time common discussions but there were times in the way they were said that if you really thought about it had a very negative innuendo and and you were there were female students there were on average
three to five female students now in the classes.
Mary Heron was there as a graduate student, so there was one other semi-faculty type of person, and she was not allowed on the staff at the time because of her husband was on the staff, and therefore that was not allowed.
You couldn't have two from the same faculty, or from the same family.
And as you participated in faculty meetings, departmental meetings and everything from the very first?
Yeah, I stayed very active and I had learned at Minnesota that in order to really understand what was going on, it was best to be active in the faculty issues and meetings and to participate.
And so I did and learned a lot and became very good friends with the faculty members.
So that was the right thing to do for several reasons.
And in those early years, to whom did you turn for advice and counsel?
In the early years, I don't know who.
I really don't know.
There were several people that were about my age.
And probably within a group, we would discuss things.
But I don't remember a single person that stood out as a mentor, so to speak.
Now, describe Dr. Price and Dr. Bay and the way they went about leading the college in those years.
Dr. Price, I remember as a consummate professional.
He was always dressed appropriately.
He spoke very eloquently.
Dr. Bay also had a very high professional image and was well respected.
And that, as a young professional person, I think was very, very important.
It wasn't that I was around them a lot, but it was always the respect of the position that they held that I think is very important.
And it's certainly something that has changed a lot over the years.
What did a young female faculty member wear in those days?
Well, I had always kind of been indoctrinated that, you know, basically you wore heels and a dress, but I went through school.
Girls wore dresses to school.
Pantsuits didn't even come in until, oh, probably ten years, five to ten years into my professional time here.
And I was late in wearing that because that was not the thing to do.
I recognized that there was a role model image that I did have to perform.
Certainly in the laboratory, I'd wear a lab coat and I didn't usually wear heels because that was a solid concrete floor.
So tennis shoes were okay, just to keep your feet comfortable.
And then when you were on professional duty with a lab coat and so forth, you all wore the same lab coats, didn't you?
Well, the students wore a different color lab coat.
But I mean the professionals.
The professionals.
White was kind of the thing to wear.
So everyone pretty much had white lab coats.
They may have been jackets or longer coats.
And were there social events that faculty members attended?
Generally, there weren't many things for social events.
You kind of made your own thing.
And I was busy riding and showing horses literally all over the country, so it didn't make much difference.
I had plenty of things to do.
And where did you find a place to live and what was housing like here compared to Minnesota?
Well, I found my first concern was the horse.
And once the horse was taken care of, then I started looking at apartments.
And I was really lucky because at that time, there were several new apartment complexes that had just gone in.
And I chose Travis House Apartments on Highway 30, which is now Harvey Road.
It was brand new, moved into a brand new apartment.
And it really didn't interact much with the people that were there.
Remember what the rent was?
That would be an interesting comparison with the present.
I want to say it was about $150 a month.
And did prices here compared to Minneapolis seem?
Prices were about the same.
They were actually a little bit cheaper, but I didn't have the winter kinds of things, so I didn't need the heavy woolens, the winter coats, the winter tires, and so on.
Now, surely you had some learning experiences about becoming a Texan, somebody trying to explain something that you're not understanding?
The first experience, there were two experiences that I remember, and they were not, well, there are actually three, one here and two elsewhere.
The first year, showing horses was a very, very important part of my life at that time.
And I went up to the State Fair at Dallas.
And the first typical Texan that I saw, the long, tall Texan, was from Indiana.
Then I went on another horse show, and I stayed with a family in northeast Texas, near Terrell.
And I remember getting so tired listening.
because they talked funny.
And it wasn't the southern drawl, and you really had to listen very hard.
My mother subsequently confirmed that that was true, because when she would get tired of listening to my husband, she'd just tell him to be quiet so she could stop listening.
The third experience that I think of was one that really had to do with Texas A&M and many of the traditions here.
I knew that ROTC, as we would call it in Minnesota, was a big deal, but I didn't realize the extent of the importance here.
So when I came down during the first week I had to make several trips over on campus to
sign up for different things and get registered for different things.
And I met several of the guys in the core walking across campus.
Well, I didn't know anything about senior spurs and senior boots.
And I thought, well, that looks pretty stupid walking around with jodhpurs.
I wonder if they've ever even been on a horse.
And then they'd keep saying, howdy ma'am, howdy ma'am, howdy ma'am.
And I started looking to make sure my slip wasn't showing and that my zippers were zipped and so on, because it was a totally foreign experience to me.
Did anyone ever attempt to straighten you out about anything or explain to you?
No, I never had that happen to me.
I certainly was involved in lots of discussions where different traditions were described, usually somebody reminiscing about.
And just sitting, I can remember sitting back so many times and listening to the pranks that were pulled in the dorm, core dorms, and that type of thing that, you know, you had to grow to love the place just based on the types of pranks that went on because it was very easy to see how important that experience could become and to understand how the experience at A&M could be
have a deeper meaning to Aggies than an experience at another college campus would have to those alums.
Describe the department and its facilities, its resources.
What was the department when you got here?
The Department of Anatomy is not much different now than it was at that time.
There was a very large gross anatomy lab.
There was a small lab at the beginning, or front edge of it, and then you walk through that into a larger lab.
We still use the same facilities today.
The first floor was primarily gross anatomists.
Offices were primarily second floor.
And then the histology course was taught over in room 230, which has been remodeled.
It's the same basic core space.
The biomedical program grew during the time that I was involved with that department, and so we would watch teaching laboratories become more and more crowded as more and more students occupied the same amount of room.
And who were the key people in the department then?
The key people, well, my area was in gross anatomy.
So Arden Kimler was here at the time and probably was, he was the elder senior state's person as far as gross anatomy was concerned.
Racist taught some gross, Gerald Bratton, George Stott,
Mike Shively came shortly thereafter.
Ed Smallwood was here teaching gross at the time.
Ed and I actually started at about the same time.
So we kind of became classmates, if you will, in the educational experience.
And what were your duties?
Describe your assignment.
My assignment, when I first came, I worked with large animal gross anatomy because that was the easiest one.
In fact, I actually started with a graduate class so that I could learn the gross to teach the next semester to the veterinary students.
My real interest was in the applied anatomy course because I've always been very clinically oriented, and that
took anatomy from the dull cadaver into the exam room, which is where the students wanted to go.
I came during the trimester time, that era, and it was kind of interesting because
In teaching gross anatomy, the dog gross was taught in the fall, large animal gross was taught in the spring, and those were two freshmen or first-year veterinary students.
The second-year students in the third or summer semester got the applied anatomy.
they were burned out.
It was a very interesting contrast to watch the enthusiasm of the first year, tampered a little bit by the second semester, but really burned out by the sixth semester of constant school.
Now, how did the program here, as you understood it in those areas,
How did that compare with your experience back at Minnesota?
The program is different.
My experience was on a quarter system.
So we had three quarters and ended around the first of June.
We got our summers off to work or do whatever.
The semester program meant basically going year- or trimester program meant basically going year-round.
While from a teaching standpoint, it didn't make a lot of difference.
I was going to be doing something anyway.
You could certainly see the devastation that it was having on the students.
And how did the students here compare with the students at Minnesota?
Oh, students are students.
They're all wonderful people.
There's always that enthusiasm, which is the fun part about working with freshmen, because there is an enthusiasm.
They're wonderful people.
Not that they aren't wonderful by the time that they're seniors, but they're different by the time that they're seniors.
So I always enjoyed that enthusiasm, the wanting to learn, because this is what we came for.
This is what we want to do.
All right, now, you equated them in their enthusiasm and so forth.
Was there a difference in their background?
Were there more urban kids up in Minnesota and more rural here?
No, at the time, the rural and urban is more a timing factor and a date factor as opposed to
the influence of location.
We were seeing farm kids and rural students coming in in Minnesota as well as down here.
The change has occurred as grades became a more important selection criteria.
So that the students that came from a rural background often didn't have, not that they weren't bright and didn't have experiences, but grades were not important.
They came from smaller schools and were not often as competitive in a college situation.
And so that's when we started seeing the change to more urban students.
And let's see, your assignment was to teach what?
My assignment was to teach actually all three types of gross anatomy.
And that was normally to first-year students?
The dog and large animal anatomy is taught to first-year students, and the applied anatomy would be taught to second-year students, sixth trimester students.
Right now, describe how you worked full-time but also worked on your own degree.
We were allowed to take four hours of class time while we worked full time.
Per semester?
Per semester.
So each semester, I'd find some kind of class to go to.
And my degree was in medicine and surgery, small animal medicine and surgery.
And so I took classes primarily over in the small animal department, plus research and so on.
which to me was really, it helped me teach in the applied anatomy course, it kept my hands in the clinics, it gave me an opportunity to get to know the clinicians at the other end of the building very well.
So I felt comfortable really around all the faculty.
Because of my horse interest, I was out in large animal as much as I was anywhere else, and I was going to be teaching that.
So I needed to know what kinds of things they were doing and, you know, kind of keep my fingers everywhere.
All right, now you were working, did you do a master's degree first?
I did a master's degree.
And who was your thesis advisor?
Ned Ellett.
was here at that time.
Ned was chair of the small animal department at the time.
He was my chair.
Dean Gage was on my committee, and Charlie Hall was on my committee.
And your thesis topic?
Was on EEGs in normal anesthetized cats.
Cats.
That had never been done.
Charlie Hall and Bill Clem had done dogs, but the cat had not been done.
So it was a good step.
And about how long did it take to do that?
It took three years to do that.
So I graduated.
I got my degree in some class of 72.
Then you're a PhD.
Did not do a PhD.
By that time, I had developed an interest in animal behavior.
And there wasn't a program on campus that really would allow me to develop that.
And it turns out I ended up being really one of the pioneers in the veterinary behavior aspects of it because it hadn't been developed.
Describe that.
Well, first of all, I've been described as the grandmother of, not the mother of, but the grandmother of veterinary behavior.
Back in the very early 70s, there was a dog club in Harlingen, Texas that called the department and said they wanted somebody to come down and talk about behavior.
And I don't remember how I happened to get the call, but I thought, you know, I've read about this as a senior veterinary student.
I know as much about it as anybody.
I'll do it.
And they also wanted some on confirmation.
Well, confirmation is applied anatomy.
And that is an area that I've certainly had an interest in primarily because of horse, but it
obviously related to dog as well.
So I thought I can do this.
So I went down and started and I thought you know this is kind of interesting and got to do more reading and started picking up some research money and did some research projects in various aspects of behavior.
Did a lot of just kind of observing and
you know, low budget types of research projects and that kind of became my area of expertise.
So, and RACIS was very generous in allowing faculty to pursue those kinds of areas.
helped and encouraged me to look at different areas of behavior.
It fit in with neuro and the EEG types of things we could find and because of it actually found some abnormal behavior patterns that really have a neurological basis.
So was able to develop that.
And that began about when?
That was in the very early 70s.
Continued to develop gradually and then
By the mid-'80s, I actually developed an allergy to formaldehyde, which doesn't work real well being a gross anatomist and having that kind of allergy.
So I was put into the histology lab.
Well, I've never done real well with microscopic things.
And it was OK, but it truly wasn't where my interests or love were.
At that time, George Shelton was dean of the college, and he decided that, you know, it's time for behavior to get to the clinics.
And he literally moved my position into the Department of Small Animal Medicine Surgery.
I came in on a year's trial basis, both ways, and it worked out.
A couple of years later, I was appointed as chair of the medicine section within that department and have been there ever since.
describe to an outsider the clinic operation, the small animal clinic operation?
Oh, the clinic operation.
The clinics, when I first came, basically were in the old building, which has since been remodeled, but they were old concrete cages, kind of gloomy, but
reasonably serviceable at the time.
Shortly thereafter, the new small animal clinic, which isn't so new anymore, but was built,
Two stories, lots of office space, wonderful cage space, and it's interesting to watch over time how a facility that works really well in one era, the demands of the profession change, the needs change, and so now we're looking at remodeling a building that had worked quite well at one time.
The new
types of disciplines within small animal parallel the changes that have occurred in human medicine.
and so it's very fun for me to watch the evolution of veterinary medicine as a whole and certainly small animal medicine and surgery in particular over time there are disciplines that i mean you didn't think of a discipline cardiologists weren't cardiologists at that time ken kenauer had come shortly before i had
and really kind of started developing cardiology.
You didn't have orthopedic surgeons and soft tissue surgeons and neurosurgeons.
You had surgeons.
Well, it didn't take very long before they started becoming a separate group.
have internists, and now you do.
Within the internists, you didn't have the GI folks and the urology folks and the neurology folks, but now you do.
This whole discipline of veterinary medicine has changed the specialties.
Even today, only about 10% of veterinarians are specialists, contrasted to about 85% of human physicians are, in fact, specialists.
So the demand is slowly growing as people have more income to spend on their pets.
The pet has changed.
It used to be the farm dog and the farm cat.
We don't spend money on them.
They're lucky if they get their shots.
Now they're family members, and so we'll spend anything, any amount of money on our animal.
That has driven specialties within veterinary medicine.
On that, let's grab onto that change.
Early in your experience here, the typical animal brought to the small animal clinic was what brought by whom?
The typical animal was still a pet, but it usually was the dog that lived in the backyard.
It was brought often by the wife because at that time, most women still were not working outside of the home.
Was it a purebred?
No, it usually was a mutt.
We saw purebreds, but that has obviously changed over time.
And today we see as many cats as we do dogs.
Many of the cats are purebred, although certainly it's a much higher population of dogs that are purebreds that come in.
They could be brought by either
by any family member.
In fact, sometimes it's the children that bring them in.
Often we, of course, here we see college students and they have now their first pet.
Sometimes it is an animal that was their family pet and they brought it to school with them.
Sometimes it's one that they have gotten.
And so the type of education that we do to that individual is very different.
They've never had a dog or cat before.
They don't know about feeding.
They don't know about shots.
They don't know about good health care prevention.
We have new diseases that we didn't have back then.